                                                                          
                              QENTA NOLDORINWA                             
                                                                                                                                                    
                             Pennas-na-Ngoelaidh.                          
                                                                          
                  This is the brief History of the Noldoli                 
                 or Gnomes, drawn from the Book of Lost Tales               
                 which Eriol of Leithien wrote, having read                
                the Golden Book, which the Eldar call Parma                
                 Kuluina,* in Kortirion in Tol Eressea, the               
                                Lonely Isle.                               


                                                                              
                                        10.                                    
                                                                              
       In these days of doubt and fear, after the Second  Battle,              
   many dreadful things befell of  which but  few are  here told.              
   It is  told that  Beor was  slain and  Barahir yielded  not to              
   Morgoth, but  all his  land was  won from  him and  his people              
   scattered,  enslaved  or slain,  and he  himself went  in out-              
   lawry  with  his  son Beren  and ten  faithful men.  Long they              
   hid  and  did  secret  and  valiant deeds  of war  against the              
   Orcs. But in the end, as is told in the  beginning of  the lay              
   of  Luthien and  Beren, the  hiding place  of Barahir  was be-              
   trayed,  and he  was slain  and his  comrades, all  save Beren              
   who by  fortune was  that day  hunting afar.  Thereafter Beren              
   lived an outlaw alone,  save for  the help  he had  from birds              
   and beasts which he loved;  and seeking  for death  in desper-              
   ate deeds found it  not, but  glory and  renown in  the secret              
   songs  of  fugitives and  hidden enemies  of Morgoth,  so that              
   the tale of his  deeds came  even to  Broseliand, and  was ru-              
   moured  in  Doriath.  At  length  Beren  fled  south  from the              
   ever-closing circle of those that hunted him, and  crossed the              
   dreadful  Mountains  of Shadow,and came  at last  worn and              
   haggard  into  Doriath.  There in  secret he  won the  love of              
   Luthien  daughter  of  Thingol,  and  he  named  her Tinuviel,              

  the nightingale, because of the  beauty of  her singing  in the
  twilight beneath the  trees; for  she was  the daughter  of Me-
  lian.                                                          
    But  Thingol was  wroth and  he dismissed  him in  scorn, but
  did not slay him because  he had  sworn an  oath to  his daugh-
  ter. But he desired nonetheless to send him to his  death. And
  he thought in his heart of a quest that could not  be achieved,
  and he said: If thou bring me a Silmaril from the crown of     
  Morgoth, I will let Luthien wed thee, if  she will.  And Beren,
  vowed  to  achieve  this,  and  went from  Doriath to  Nargo-
  thrond bearing the ring of Barahir. The  quest of  the Silmaril
  there aroused the oath from sleep that the  sons of  Feanor had
  sworn,  and evil  began to  grow from  it. Felagund,  though he
  knew the  quest to  be beyond  his power,  was willing  to lend
  all his aid to Beren, because of his own oath to Barahir. But
  Celegorm  and  Curufin  dissuaded his  people and  roused up
  rebellion  against  him.  And  evil  thoughts  awoke  in their
  hearts, and they thought to usurp  the throne  of Nargothrond,
  because they were sons of the eldest line. Rather than a Sil-
  maril  should be  won and  given to  Thingol, they  would ruin
  the power of Doriath and Nargothrond.                          
    So  Felagund  gave  his  crown   to  Orodreth   and  departed
  from his people with  Beren and  ten faithful  men of  his own-
  board.  They  waylaid  an  Orc-band  and  slew  them  and  dis-
  guised  themselves  by the  aid of  Felagund's magic  as Orcs.-
  But  they  were  seen  by  Thu  from  his   watchtower,  which'
  once  had  been  Felagund's  own,   and  were   questioned  by
  him,  and  their  magic  was  overthrown  in a  contest between
  Thu  and  Felagund.  Thus  they  were  revealed  as  Elves, but
  the  spells  of  Felagund  concealed  their  names  and  quest.
  Long  they  were  tortured  in  the dungeons  of Thu,  but none
  betrayed the other.                                            
    In  the  meanwhile  Luthien  learning  by  the  far  sight of
  Melian that Beren  had fallen  into the  power of  Thu sought
  in  her  despair  to  fly  from Doriath.  This became  known to
  Thingol, who imprisoned her in a  house in  the tallest  of his
  mighty  beeches  far  above  the  ground.  How she  escaped and
  came into the woods, and was found there by Celegorm as        

 they hunted on the borders of Doriath, is told  in the  lay of
 Luthien.  They  took  her  treacherously  to  Nargothrond, and
 Curufin  the  crafty  became  enamoured  of  her  beauty. From
 her  tale  they  learned  that  Felagund was  in the  hands of
 Thu;  and  they  purposed to  let him  perish there,  and keep
 Luthien  with  them,  and  force  Thingol  to  wed  Luthien to
 Curufin,4  and  so  build  up  their  power  and  usurp Nargo-
 thrond  and  become  the  mightiest  of  the  princes  of  the
 Gnomes.  They  did  not  think  to  go in  search of  the Sil-
 marils, or suffer any others to do so, until they had  all the
 power  of  the  Elves  beneath  themselves  and   obedient  to
 them.  But  their  designs  came  to nought  save estrangement
 and bitterness between the kingdoms of the Elves.            
   Huan  was  the  name  of   the  chief   of  the   hounds  of
 Celegorm.  He  was  of  immortal  race from  the hunting-lands
 of  Orome.  Orome  gave  him  to   Celegorm  long   before  in
 Valinor,  when Celegorm  often rode  in the  train of  the God
 and  followed his  horn. He  came into  the Great'  Lands with
 his  master,  and  dart  nor weapon,  spell nor  poison, could
 harm  him,  so  that  he went  into battle  with his  lord and
 saved  him  many  times  from  death.  His  fate had  been de-
 creed that he should not meet death save at  the hands  of the
 mightiest wolf that should ever walk the world.              
   Huan  was  true  of  heart,  and he  loved Luthien  from the
 hour that  he first  found her  in the  woods and  brought her
 to Celegorm.  His heart  was grieved  by his  master's treach-
 ery, and he set Luthien free and went with her to the North.
   There  Thu  slew  his  captives  one   by  one,   till  only
 Felagund  and  Beren  were  left.  When  the hour  for Beren's
 death came Felagund  put forth  all his  power, and  burst his
 bonds,  and  wrestled  with  the  werewolf  that came  to slay
 Beren; and he killed the wolf,  but was  himself slain  in the
 dark.  There  Beren  mourned  in   despair,  and   waited  for
 death.  But  Luthien  came  and  sang  outside  the  dungeons.
 Thus  she  beguiled Thu  to come  forth, for  the fame  of the
 loveliness  of  Luthien  had  gone through  all lands  and the
 wonder  of  her  song.  Even  Morgoth  desired  her,  and  had
 promised the  greatest reward  to any  who could  capture her.

 Each wolf  that Thu  sent Huan  slew silently,  till Draugluin
 the  greatest  of  his  wolves  came.  Then  there  was fierce
 battle, and Thu knew that Luthien  was not  alone. But  he re-
 membered  the fate  of Huan,  and he  made himself  the great-
 est wolf that had yet walked the world, and came forth. But 
 Huan  overthrew  him,  and  won  from  him  the  keys  and the
 spells that held together his enchanted  walls and  towers. So
 the stronghold was  broken and  the towers  thrown down  and
 the dungeons opened. Many captives were released, but        
 Thu  flew  in  bat's  form  to  Taur-na-Fuin.   There  Luthien
 found  Beren  mourning  beside Felagund.  She healed  his sor-
 row  and  the  wasting  of  his  imprisonment,   but  Felagund
 they buried on the top of his own island hill, and Thu  came
 there no more.                                               
   Then  Huan returned  to his  master, and  less was  the love
 between  them  after.  Beren  and  Luthien  wandered  careless
 in happiness, until they came nigh to  the borders  of Doriath
 once more. There Beren remembered his vow, and bade         
 Luthien farewell, but she would not be sundered from him.
 In  Nargothrond  there  was  tumult.  For  Huan  and  many  of
 the  captives of  Thu brought  back the  tidings of  the deeds
 of Luthien, and the death of Felagund, and the treachery of
 Celegorm and Curufin was laid bare. It is  said they  had sent
 a secret embassy to Thingol ere Luthien escaped, but         
 Thingol in wrath had sent their letters back  by his  own ser-
 vants to Orodreth.' Wherefore  now the  hearts of  the people:
 of  Narog  tumed  back  to  the  house  of  Finrod,  and  they
 mourned  their  king  Felagund  whom  they  had  forsaken, and
 they did the bidding of Orodreth.  But he  would not  suffer 
 them to slay the  sons of  Feanor as  they wished.  Instead he
 banished  them from  Nargothrond, and  swore that  little love
 should there be between Narog and any of the sons of         
 Feanor thereafter. And so it was.                            
   Celegorm  and  Curufin  were  riding  in  haste and  wrath 
 through the woods to find their way to  Himling, when they
 came  upon Beren  and Luthien,  even as  Beren sought  to part
 from  his  love.  They  rode  down  on  them,  and recognizing
 them  tried  to   trample  Beren   under  their   hooves.  But

 Curufin swerving lifted Luthien to  his saddle.  Then befell
 the leap  of Beren,  the greatest  leap of  mortal Men.  For he
 sprang like a lion right  upon the  speeding horse  of Curufin,
 and grasped him  about the  throat, and  horse and  rider fell
 in confusion upon  the earth,  but Luthien  was flung  far off
 and   lay   dazed   upon  the   ground.  There   Beren  choked
 Curufin,  but  his  death  was  very  nigh from  Celegorm, who
 rode back with his spear. In that hour Huan forsook the ser-
 vice  of  Celegorm,  and  sprang  upon him  so that  his horse
 swerved aside, and no man for fear of the terror of  the great
 hound dared  go nigh.  Luthien forbade  the death  of Curufin,
 but Beren despoiled  him of  his horse  and weapons,  chief of
 which  was  his  famous  knife,  made   by  the   Dwarves.  It
 would  cut iron  like wood.  Then the  brothers rode  off, but
 shot  back  at Huan  treacherously and  at Luthien.  Huan they
 did  not  hurt,  but  Beren sprang  before Luthien  and was
 wounded,   and   Men   remembered   that  wound   against  the
 sons of Feanor, when it became known.                         
    Huan stayed with Luthien, and  hearing of  their perplexity
 and the  purpose Beren  had still  to go  to Angband,  he went
 and fetched them  from the  ruined halls  of Thu  a werewolf's
 coat and a bat's. Three times only did  Huan speak  with the
 tongue  of  Elves or  Men. The  first was  when he  came to
 Luthien  in  Nargothrond.  This  was the  second, when  he de-
 vised  the  desperate counsel  for their  quest. So  they rode
 North, till they could no longer go on  horse in  safety. Then
 they  put  on  the  garments as  of wolf  and bat,  and Luthien
 in guise of evil fay rode upon the werewolf.                  
    In  the  lay  of  Luthien  is  all  told  how they  came to
 Angband's  gate,  and found  it newly  guarded, for  rumour of
 he  knew  not  what  design  abroad among  the Elves  had come
 to  Morgoth.  Wherefore  he  fashioned  the  mightiest  of all
 Wolves,  Carcharas Knife-fang,  to  sit  at the  gates.' But
 Luthien  set  him in  spells, and  they won  their way  to the
 presence  of  Morgoth,  and  Beren  slunk  beneath  his chair.
  Then Luthien dared the most dreadful and most valiant
  deed that any of the women of the Elves have ever dared;
  no less than the challenge of Fingolfin is it accounted, and

 may be greater, save that she was half-divine. She cast off
 her disguise and named her own name, and feigned that she     
 was brought captive by the wolves of Thu. And she be-         
 guiled Morgoth, even as his heart plotted foul evil within
 him; and she danced before him, and cast all his court in     
 sleep; and she sang to him, and she flung the magic robe      
 she had woven in Doriath in his face, and she set a binding
 dream upon him - what song can sing the marvel of that        
 deed, or the wrath and humiliation of Morgoth, for even the
 Orcs laugh in secret when they remember it, telling how      
 Morgoth fell from his chair and his iron crown rolled upon
 the floor.                                                    
   Then forth leaped Beren casting aside the wolvish robe,     
 and drew out the knife of Curufin. With that he cut forth a
 Silmaril. But daring more he essayed to gain them all. Then:
 the knife of the treacherous Dwarves snapped, and the ring-
 ing sound of it stirred the sleeping hosts and Morgoth        
 groaned. Terror seized the hearts of Beren and Luthien, and
 they fled down the dark ways of Angband. The doors were       
 barred by Carcharas, now aroused from the spell of            
 Luthien. Beren set himself before Luthien, which proved ill;
 for ere she could touch the wolf with her robe or speak       
 word of magic, he sprang upon Beren, who now had no         
 weapon. With his right he smote at the eyes of Carcharas,
 but the wolf took the hand into his jaws and bit it off. Now
 that hand held the Silmaril. Then was the maw of Carcharas
 burned with a fire of anguish and torment, when the           
 Silmaril touched his evil flesh; and he fled howling from
 before them, so that all the mountains shuddered, and the     
 madness of the wolf of Angband was of all the horrors that
 ever came into the North o the most dire and terrible.        
 Hardly did Luthien and Beren escape, ere all Angband was      
 aroused.                                                      
   Of their wanderings and despair, and of the healing of      
 Beren, who ever since has been called Beren Ermabwed the      
 One-handed, of their rescue by Huan, who had vanished,        
 suddenly from them ere they came to Angband, and of their     
 coming to Doriath once more, here there is little to tell.

 But in Doriath  many things  had befallen.  Ever things had
 gone ill there since Luthien fled away.  Grief had  fallen on
 all the people and silence on their songs when  their hunting
 found  her  not.  Long  was  the  search,  and  in  searching
 Dairon  the  piper  of  Doriath was  lost, who  loved Luthien
 before  Beren came  to Doriath.  He was  the greatest  of the
 musicians  of  the  Elves,  save  Maglor  son of  Feanor, and
 Tinfang  Warble.  But  he  came  never  back  to  Doriath and
 strayed into the East of the world.                     
    Assaults too there were on Doriath's borders,  for rumours
 that  Luthien  was  astray had  reached Angband.  Boldog cap-
 tain of the Orcs was there  slain in  battle by  Thingol, and
 his   great   warriors   Beleg   the   Bowman   and   Mablung
 Heavyhand  were  with  Thingol in  that battle.  Thus Thingol
 learned that Luthien  was yet  free of  Morgoth, but  that he
 knew of her wandering; and Thingol was  filled with  fear. In
                                                             
                                                             
 the midst of his fear came the embassy of Celegorm in se-
 cret,  and  said  that  Beren  was  dead,  and  Felagund, and
 Luthien  was  at Nargothrond.  Then Thingol  found it  in his
 heart  to  regret  the  death  of  Beren,  and his  wrath was
 aroused at the hinted treachery of Celegorm  to the  house of
 Finrod,  and because  he kept  Luthien and  did not  send her
 home. Wherefore he sent  spies into  the land  of Nargothrond
 and prepared for war. But  he learned  that Luthien  had fled
 and  that Celegorm  and his  brother were  gone to  Aglon. So
 now he  sent an  embassy to  Aglon, since  his might  was not
 great enough to fall upon all the seven brethren, nor was his
 quarrel  with  others  than  Celegorm  and Curufin.  But this
 embassy journeying  in the  woods met  with the  onslaught of
 Carcharas. That great wolf had run in madness through all
 the  woods  of  the  North,  and  death and  devastation went
 with  him.  Mablung  alone escaped  to bear  the news  of his
 coming  to Thingol.  Of fate,  or the  magic of  the Silmaril
 that he bore to his torment, he was not stayed by  the spells
 of Melian,  but burst  into the  inviolate woods  of Doriath,
 and far and wide terror and destruction was spread.          
    Even as the sorrows of  Doriath were  at their  worst came
 Luthien  and  Beren  and  Huan  back  to  Doriath.  Then  the

 heart of Thingol was lightened, but he looked not with love
 upon Beren in whom he saw the cause of all his woes.        
 When he had learned how Beren had escaped from Thu he       
 was amazed, but he said: 'Mortal, what of thy quest and of
 thy vow?' Then said Beren: 'Even now I have a Silmaril in
 my hand.' 'Show it to me,' said Thingol. 'That I cannot,'
 said Beren, 'for my hand is not here.' And all the tale he
 told, and made clear the cause of the madness of Carcharas,
 and Thingol's h art was softened by his brave words, and
 his forbearance, and the great love that he saw between his
 daughter and this most valiant Man.                         
   Now therefore did they plan the wolf-hunt of Carcharas.
 In that hunt was Huan and Thingol and Mablung and Beleg     
 and Beren and no more. And here the sad tale of it must be
 short, for it is elsewhere told more fully. Luthien remained
 behind in foreboding, as they went forth; and well she      
 might, for Carcharas was slain, but Huan died in the same
 hour, and he died to save Beren.' Yet Beren was hurt to the
 death, but lived to place the Silmaril in the hands of      
 Thingol, when Mablung had cut it from the belly of the 
 wolf. Then he spoke not again, until they had borne him     
 with Huan at his side back to the doors of Thingol's halls.
 There beneath the beech, wherein before she had been im-
 prisoned, Luthien met them, and kissed Beren ere his spirit
 departed to the halls of awaiting. So ended the long tale of
 Luthien and Beren. But not yet was the lay of Leithian, re-
 lease from bondage, told in full. For it has long been said
 that Luthien failed and faded swiftly and vanished from the
 earth, though some songs say that Melian summoned           
 Thorndor, and he bore her living unto Valinor. And she      
 came to the halls of Mandos, and she sang to him a tale of
 moving love so fair that he was moved to pity, as never has
 befallen since. Beren he summoned, and thus, as Luthien     
 had sworn as she kissed him at the hour of death, they met
 beyond the western sea. And Mandos suffered them to de-     
 part, but he said that Luthien should become mortal even as
 her lover, and should leave the earth once more in the man-
 ner of mortal women, and her beauty become but a mem-      

 ory of song. So it was, but it is said that  in recompense           
 Mandos  gave  to Beren  and to  Luthien thereafter  a long           
 span of life and joy, and they wandered knowing thirst nor           
 cold in the  fair land  of Broseliand,  and no  mortal Man           
 thereafter spoke to Beren or his spouse. Yet he came back           
 into these tales when one more sad than his was done.                
                                                                     
                                 

